Polonnaruwa Rajakeeya Madya Maha Vidyalaya (Polonnaruwa Royal Central College) is located in පොළොන්නරුව, Sri Lanka.  On 19 April 1959, an investment was made to construct a college to provide for the education. Hon. C.P.Silva, the minister of land development and electricity led this movement. His priority was to introduce the concept of "Central Colleges ". He considered that free education should be a right of the whole society.


== History ==

After 6 years of laying the foundation stone Polonnaruwa Rajakeeya Maha Vidyalaya was opened for sons and daughters of farmers in Pulathisipura. Scholarships weres offered to students in Polonnaruwa and Trincomalee districts.
Polonnaruwa Rajakeeya Maha Vidyalaya had been built so that it could provide a world class education for its students and to compete with other educational institutions. The main objective of the school was to give proper educational opportunities for the children of farmers.
The physical resources of the college in 1965

Class rooms -32
Laboratories -4 (bio, physics, chemistry and agriculture)
Esthetics unites-3
Theatre -1
Library-1
Office rooms and other rooms
Hostels -2 (male and female)
Open Theatry-1
Stadium -1
Teacher's house-3
Laborer's house-3
Including above mentioned resources, the school possessed 54 acres (220,000 m2) and paddy fields. The income of these land was used for the school.
Polonnaruwa Rajakeeya Maha Vidyalaya has the most land in Sri Lanka. The school is well planned that a person can go to any place of the school without getting wet in the rain. A great attention has been paid for the infra-structure facilities of the school.
A great attention has been paid for the security also. Alight system had been set up covering the whole school premises. A touring watcher had been set red.

In the beginning students were recruited to grade 9 and up words. Scholarship holder was included to this.
Students were selected for art, commerce, and science classes by scholarship examination in grade 8.
Mr. D.B. karunathilaka who rendered a yeoman service was the first principle.Mr. R.W. Galahitiyawa was the vice principle. In 1965, the staff was around 22.
D.M. soomarathna was the first prefect who led the student. Rupawathi was the first female prefect. Athulathmudali was first student of the school.
After 1965 the school was under the guidance of the several principals.

Mr.samarasekara
Mr.Rasigolla
Mr.Sinharachchi
In 1971 the school was closed due to the rebellion. Mr. soomasiri weerashinha was the principle in charge at that time. The school became a rehabilitation camp. No educational activity was conducted for 3 years in the school. In tread of it commerce class were held in the irrigation office. Science class was held in Topawewa School. Mr. Premathilaka was in charge of them.
After rehabilitation camp school was handed over. Then much physical resource had been destroyed hostel facilities had been destroyed completely.
These 3 year of period was the gloomiest time of the school history. After 1971 the school had a time of bad luck. Though some rehabilitation was carried out the school was not in previous condition.


== Alumni of Polonnaruwa Rajakeeya Madya Maha Vidyalaya ==
Main Article:
Past pupils of Polonnaruwa Rajakeeya Madya Maha Vidyalaya are known as Alumni of Polonnaruwa Rajakeeya Madya Maha Vidyalaya, they include many distinguished figures in Sri Lanka.


== References ==

Royal College Polonnaruwa on Facebook
Polonnaruwa Rajakeeya Maha Vidyalaya Web Site